codewrecks/content/page/git.md, before:

---
title: Git Videos
description: A list of Git related YouTube Videos
comments: false
menu: main
---

I've started to create some Git related videos in my YouTube profile, this post will collect all of them for easier access.

Code that I've shown in these video available on [GitHub](https://github.com/alkampfergit/GitCoursePublic)

- **Git Internals**
  - First Command: Hash Object. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/oSX9XBoZLRk) 
  - More on Hash Object and Cat-File command. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/KJ34Nw6Pco0)
  - First Commit [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/1YK2utXGUVA)
  - Second Commit and more on Git Add [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/pR9FtRYSZ8c)
- **Git Branching**
  - Branch 101: branch is no more than a text file [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/jPqeAOghyTA)
  - Merge branches: how to merge branch back into main branch [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/7OVa5qsHZVw)
  - Merge branches: close a branch with rebase strategy [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/ZzLcYH9wjng)
- **Collaborating with git**
  - Remotes - An introduction [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/S0LcsBekjeM)
  - Remotes - simple two developers colleaboration workflow [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/KfJgrid2MzI)
- **Azure DevOps**
  - Index your .NET code thanks to Azure DevOps symbol server [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/XDKLDOfdb0k)  
- **GitHub**
  - Perform Security Code Analysis in GitHub with CodeQL and GitHub actions. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/5x0FXK0rUT0)
  - How to setup a GitHub Action Workflow to run CodeQL analysis on your code. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/syNCq7h-CNA)

Happy watching

Commit message:

updated page of git video list

codewrecks/content/page/git.md, after:

---
title: Git Videos
description: A list of Git related YouTube Videos
comments: false
menu: main
---

I've started to create some Git related videos in my YouTube profile, this post will collect all of them for easier access.

Code that I've shown in these video available on [GitHub](https://github.com/alkampfergit/GitCoursePublic)

- **Git Internals**
  - First Command: Hash Object. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/oSX9XBoZLRk) 
  - More on Hash Object and Cat-File command. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/KJ34Nw6Pco0)
  - First Commit [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/1YK2utXGUVA)
  - Second Commit and more on Git Add [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/pR9FtRYSZ8c)
- **Git Branching**
  - Branch 101: branch is no more than a text file [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/jPqeAOghyTA)
  - Merge branches: how to merge branch back into main branch [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/7OVa5qsHZVw)
  - Merge branches: close a branch with rebase strategy [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/ZzLcYH9wjng)
- **Collaborating with git**
  - Remotes - An introduction [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/S0LcsBekjeM)
  - Remotes - simple two developers colleaboration workflow [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/KfJgrid2MzI)
- **Azure DevOps**
  - How Git connects to your Azure Repositories [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/SmadNFAnQf8)
  - Index your .NET code thanks to Azure DevOps symbol server [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/XDKLDOfdb0k)  
- **GitHub**
  - Perform Security Code Analysis in GitHub with CodeQL and GitHub actions. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/5x0FXK0rUT0)
  - How to setup a GitHub Action Workflow to run CodeQL analysis on your code. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/syNCq7h-CNA)
  - How to use a Yubikey on Windows to secure your SSH key to connect to GitHub with SSH protocol. [YouTube Video](https://youtu.be/vRYkiHBHehI)

Happy watching
